# Chap1

Comparing Capelin Abundance Estimates from Predator Diet Data and an Acoustic Survey

Lynch, K.1, Koen-Alonso, M.2 & Robertson, M.D.1
1.	Centre for Fisheries Ecosystems Research, Fisheries and Marine Institute of Memorial University of Newfoundland, P.O. Box 4920, St. John’s, NL, A1C 5R3, Canada.
2.	Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Centre, P.O. Box 5667, 80 East White Hills Rd., St. John’s, NL, A1C 5X1, Canada.

In Newfoundland and Labrador, capelin (Mallotus villosus) is a critical link between zooplankton and larger vertebrates to move energy up the food web. This role in energy transfer makes capelin an integral species for effective regional fisheries management. However, the population of capelin off the east coast of Newfoundland collapsed in 1990-1991, with limited recovery since. Current understanding of capelin abundance is primarily based on a hydroacoustic survey index. This survey is conducted in the spring and is designed to cover the core of the spring distribution. However, the spring survey only covers a portion of the stock area and abundance estimates are regarded as minimum estimates. We sought to gain a better understanding of capelin abundance trends through time and add to the existing range of methodologies used in their assessment. To achieve this goal, we modified a recently developed state-space model, that estimates prey abundance from bottom-trawl research survey and predator stomach contents data, to examine the benefit of accounting for temperature-induced and ontogenetic diet shifts. We used this model to estimate capelin abundance separately for spring and fall surveys and from two bottom-trawl gears with different catchability assumptions. We found the best performing model used an ontogenetic, but not temperature, diet shift to account for changes in predator selectivity. There was inconsistent agreement between our estimates of capelin abundance and estimates from the spring acoustic survey depending on survey season and the bottom-trawl gear. Furthermore, model estimates from a spatially restricted dataset, representing the spatial coverage of the acoustic survey, did not align with estimates from a model with data across the entire stock range. These results point to a need for including the entire population range in capelin stock assessment.
